anarchism
anarchism is an anti-authoritarian political and social philosophy that rejects hierarchies deemed unjust and advocates their replacement with self-managed, self-governed societies based on voluntary, cooperative institutions. these institutions are often described as stateless societies, although several authors have defined them more specifically as distinct institutions based on non-hierarchical or free associations. anarchism's central disagreement with other ideologies is that it holds the state to be undesirable, unnecessary, and harmful.
anarchism is usually placed on the far-left of the political spectrum, and much of its economics and legal philosophy reflect anti-authoritarian interpretations of communism, collectivism, syndicalism, mutualism, or participatory economics. as anarchism does not offer a fixed body of doctrine from a single particular worldview, many anarchist types and traditions exist and varieties of anarchy diverge widely. anarchist schools of thought can differ fundamentally, supporting anything from extreme individualism to complete collectivism. strains of anarchism have often been divided into the categories of social and individualist anarchism, or similar dual classifications.
the etymological origin of the word anarchism is from the ancient greek word "anarkhia", meaning "without a ruler", composed of the prefix "a-" (i.e. "without") and the word "arkhos" (i.e. "leader" or "ruler"). the suffix -ism denotes the ideological current that favours anarchy. the word anarchism appears in english from 1642 as "anarchisme" and the word "anarchy" from 1539. various factions within the french revolution labelled their opponents as anarchists, although few such accused shared many views with later anarchists. many revolutionaries of the 19th century such as william godwin (1756–1836) and wilhelm weitling (1808–1871) would contribute to the anarchist doctrines of the next generation, but they did not use the word anarchist or anarchism in describing themselves or their beliefs.
the first political philosopher to call himself an anarchist () was pierre-joseph proudhon (1809–1865), marking the formal birth of anarchism in the mid-19th century. since the 1890s and beginning in france, the term libertarianism has often been used as a synonym for anarchism and its use as a synonym is still common outside the united states. on the other hand, some use libertarianism to refer to individualistic free-market philosophy only, referring to free-market anarchism as libertarian anarchism.
while opposition to the state is central to anarchist thought, defining anarchism is not an easy task as there is a lot of talk among scholars and anarchists on the matter and various currents perceive anarchism slightly differently. hence, it might be true to say that anarchism is a cluster of political philosophies opposing authority and hierarchical organization (including the state, capitalism, nationalism and all associated institutions) in the conduct of all human relations in favour of a society based on voluntary association, on freedom and on decentralisation, but this definition has the same shortcomings as the definition based on etymology (which is simply a negation of a ruler), or based on anti-statism (anarchism is much more than that) or even the anti-authoritarian (which is an "a posteriori" conclusion).
nonetheless, major elements of the definition of anarchism include the following:
during the prehistoric era of mankind, an established authority did not exist. it was after the creation of towns and cities that institutions of authority were established and anarchistic ideas espoused as a reaction. most notable examples of anarchism in the ancient world were in china and greece. in china, philosophical anarchism, meaning peaceful delegitimizing of the state, was delineated by taoist philosophers (i.e. zhuangzi and lao tzu). likewise in greece, anarchist attitudes were articulated by tragedians and philosophers. aeschylus and sophocles used the myth of antigone to illustrate the conflict between rules set by the state and personal autonomy. socrates questioned athenian authorities constantly and insisted to the right of individual freedom of consciousness. cynics dismissed human law ("nomos") and associated authorities while trying to live according to nature ("physis"). stoics were supportive of a society based on unofficial and friendly relations among its citizens without the presence of a state.
during the middle ages, there was no anarchistic activity except some ascetic religious movements in the islamic world or in christian europe. this kind of tradition later gave birth to religious anarchism. in persia, a zoroastrian prophet known as mazdak was calling for an egalitarian society and the abolition of monarchy, but he soon found himself executed by the king. in basra, religious sects preached against the state. in europe, various sects developed anti-state and libertarian tendencies. those currents were the precursor of religious anarchism in the centuries to come. it was in the renaissance and with the spread of reasoning and humanism through europe that libertarian ideas emerged. writers were outlining in their novels ideal societies that were based not on coercion but voluntarism. the enlightenment further pushed towards anarchism with the optimism for social progress.
the turning point towards anarchism was the french revolution in which the anti-state and federalist sentiments began to take a form, mostly by enrages and "sans-culottes". some prominent figures of anarchism begun developing the first anarchist currents. that is the era of classical anarchism that lasted until the end of the spanish civil war of 1936 and was the golden age of anarchism. william godwin espoused philosophical anarchism in england morally delegitimizing the state, max stirner's thinking paved the way to individualism and pierre-joseph proudhon's theory of mutualism found fertile soil in france.
